Document how pipelines can be more flexible (#1165)
SAP/jenkins-library: documentation/docs/extensibility.md

# Extensibility

When using one of the ready-made pipelines project "Piper" provides, the basic idea is to not write custom pipeline code.
The pipelines are centrally maintained, and can be used with a small amount of [configuration](configuration.md).

For the large majority of _standard_ projects, the features of the ready-made pipelines should be enough to implement a production-ready CI/CD workflow with little effort.

This approach allows you to focus on what you need to get done while implementing [Continuous Delivery](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ContinuousDelivery.html) in a best-practice compliant way.

If a feature you need is missing, or you discovered a bug in one of the ready-made pipelines, please see if there is already an [issue in our GitHub repository](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/issues), and open a new one if that is not the case.

In some cases, specialised features might not be desirable for inclusion in the ready-made pipelines.

> You can still benefit from the qualities the ready-made pipelines provide if you can address your requirements via an **Extension**.

Reviewer: "the ready-made pipelines" -> "they"?

Extensions are custom bits of pipeline coding that you can use to implement special requirements.

Before building extensions, please make sure that no better alternative works for you.

> Options for extensibility, in order in which we recommend considering them:

Reviewer: Would suggest: "in *the* order"

## 1) Extend individual stages

In this option, you use the centrally maintained pipeline, but can change individual stages if required.

To do so, create a file called `<StageName>.groovy` (for example, `Acceptance.groovy` or `lint.groovy`) in `.pipeline/extensions/` in your source code repository.

For this, you need to know the technical identifiers for stage names.

* For the general purpose pipeline, you can find them in [the pipeline source file](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/blob/master/vars/piperPipeline.groovy).
* For SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline, you can find them in [this GitHub search query](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline-lib/search?q=%22def+stageName+%3D%22).

The centrally maintained pipeline checks if such a file exists and executes it, if present.

> A parameter of type `map` that contains the following keys is passed to the extension:

Reviewer: Upper-case Map?

* `script`: defines the global script environment of the `Jenkinsfile` run. This makes sure that the correct configuration environment can be passed to project "Piper" steps and allows access to for example the `commonPipelineEnvironment`.
* `originalStage`: this will allow you to execute the "original" stage at any place in your script. If omitting a call to `originalStage()` only your code will be executed instead.
* `stageName`: name of the current stage
* `config`: configuration of the stage and general config (including all defaults)

> Here a simple example for such an extension, which you can use as a starting point:

Reviewer: Here *is* a simple...

> Here a simple example for such an extension, which you can use as a starting point:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a simple example for such an extension, which you can use as a starting point:
```

```groovy
void call(Map params) {
  //access stage name
  echo "Start - Extension for stage: ${params.stageName}"

  //access config
  echo "Current stage config: ${params.config}"

  //execute original stage as defined in the template
  params.originalStage()

  //access overall pipeline script object
  echo "Branch: ${params.script.commonPipelineEnvironment.gitBranch}"

  echo "End - Extension for stage: ${params.stageName}"
}
return this
```

!!! note "`return this`"
    Don't forget the `return this` which is required at the end of _all_ extension scripts.
    This is due to how Groovy loads scripts internally.

!!! note "Init stage cannot be extended"

>     Please note, the `Init` stage among other things also checks out your current repository.<br />Thus it is not possible to use extensions on this stage.

Reviewer: Please note, the `Init` stage among other things also checks out your current repository *including your extensions*.<br />Thus it is not possible to use extensions on this stage.

```groovy
def call(Map parameters) {

    parameters.originalStage.call() // Runs the built in linters

    mavenExecute(
        script: parameters.script,
        flags: '--batch-mode',
        pomPath: 'application/pom.xml',
        m2Path: s4SdkGlobals.m2Directory,
        goals: 'checkstyle:checkstyle',
    )

    recordIssues blameDisabled: true,
        enabledForFailure: true,
        aggregatingResults: false,
        tool: checkStyle()
}

return this
```

This example can be adopted for other linters of your choice.

## 2) Modified ready-made pipeline

This option describes how you can copy and paste one of the centrally maintained pipelines to make changes not possible otherwise.

For example, you can't change the order of stages, change which stages run in parallel or add new stages to a centrally maintained pipeline.

This might be done for an individual project (in the `Jenkinsfile`), or in a separate git repository so it can be used for multiple projects.

### Single project

The default `Jenkinsfile` of centrally maintained pipelines does nothing except for loading the pipeline and running it.
This is comfortable, but limits what you can modify.

> For example, you can't reorder stages, change which stages run in parallel or add new stages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You can copy and paste the existing Pipelines from those sources into your `Jenkinsfile` and make changes to it

* [piperPipeline](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/blob/master/vars/piperPipeline.groovy)
* [SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline-lib/blob/master/vars/cloudSdkPipeline.groovy)

### Multiple projects

Similar to what you can do in an individual `Jenkinsfile`, you can also copy the pipeline to a file in a separate git repository and modify it.

To do this, create a new git repository in your preferred git hosting service.
It must be compliant to [how Jenkins shared libraries are built](https://jenkins.io/doc/book/pipeline/shared-libraries/).
In a nutshell, this means you need a `vars` directory inside which you can place a copy of your preferred pipeline.

A minimal example of such a library could have this directory structure:

```
./vars/myCustomPipeline.groovy
./README.md
```

where `myCustomPipeline.groovy` contains the modified pipeline code.

!!! note

>     Your custom pipeline _must_ be named different from the other pipelines provided by project "Piper", because Jenkins requires names across multiple libraries to be unique.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Your custom pipeline _must_ be named differently from the other pipelines provided by project "Piper", because Jenkins requires names across multiple libraries to be unique.
```

This library needs to be placed in a git repository which is available for Jenkins and must be configured in Jenkins [as documented here](https://jenkins.io/doc/book/pipeline/shared-libraries/#using-libraries).

![Library Setup](images/customPipelineLib.png "Library Setup")

The `Jenkinsfile` would look similar to this:

```groovy
@Library(['piper-lib-os@vINSERT_VERSION_HERE','my-own-pipeline@vINSERT_VERSION_HERE']) _

myCustomPipeline script: this
```

Be sure to adapt the names and version identifiers accordingly.

### How to stay up-to-date

> Regardless which of the above options you chose, one downside of this approach is that your pipeline will be out of sync with the centrally maintained pipelines at some point in time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regardless which of the above options you choose, one downside of this approach is that your pipeline will be out of sync with the centrally maintained pipelines at some point in time.
```

"chose" is past tense, unless you actually meant that here. (Since this documentation is about a thing the user has likely not implemented yet, present tense seems more appropriate.)

We strongly recommend doing _as little modification as possible_ to fulfil your requirements.

> Please be aware that stages might have dependencies on each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please be aware that stages may have dependencies on each other.
```
may = können might = könnten. Konjunktiv scheint unnötig

Your pipeline should treat _stages_ as a black box, the implementation of stages is no published API and may be subject to change at any time.

!!! warning "Beware of breaking changes"
    Please be aware that when using the `master` branch of a library, it might always happen that breaking changes occur.
    We recommend to always fix versions to a released version like in this example: `@Library('my-shared-library@1.0') _`<br />
    Find the most recent release for [jenkins-library](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/releases) and for [SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline/releases) on GitHub.
    We do recommend to ["watch" releases for those repositories on GitHub](https://help.github.com/en/github/receiving-notifications-about-activity-on-github/watching-and-unwatching-releases-for-a-repository).

!!! note "When to go with a modified ready-made pipeline"
    This option is right for you, when none of the provided ready-made pipelines serves your purpose, and individual stage extensions don't provide enough flexibility.

### Advanced tips and information

> When you consider adding additional capabilities your first stop should be the [Jenkins Pipeline Steps Reference](https://jenkins.io/doc/pipeline/steps/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you consider adding additional capabilities, your first stop should be the [Jenkins Pipeline Steps Reference](https://jenkins.io/doc/pipeline/steps/).
```

Here you get an overview about what kind of capabilities are already available, and a list of related parameters which you can use to customize the existing implementation.
The provided information should help you to understand and extend the functionality of your pipeline.

## 3. Custom `Jenkinsfile`

> Since project "Piper" fully builds on [Jenkins Pipelines as Code](https://jenkins.io/doc/book/pipeline-as-code/), you can also go with your complete custom `Jenkinsfile`.

Reviewer: This may be irritating from the user's perspective: The "Jenkinsfile" is initially provided in the architype. When you modify it according to approach 2), then this would already be a considered a "complete custom Jenkinsfile". Maybe distiguish with "pipeline written from scratch"?

# Extensibility

When using one of the ready-made pipelines project "Piper" provides, the basic idea is to not write custom pipeline code.
The pipelines are centrally maintained, and can be used with a small amount of declarative configuration as documented [here](configuration.md).

For the large majority of _standard_ projects, the features of the ready-made pipelines should be enough to implement [Continuous Delivery](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ContinuousDelivery.html) in a best-practice compliant way with little effort.

> If a feature you need is missing, or you discovered a bug in one of the ready-made pipelines, please see if there is already an [issue in our GitHub repository](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/issues), and open a new one if that is not the case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a feature you need is missing, or you discovered a bug in one of the ready-made pipelines, please see if there is already an [issue in our GitHub repository](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/issues) to comment on it, or open a new one if that is not the case.
```

This approach allows you to focus on what you need to get done while implementing [Continuous Delivery](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ContinuousDelivery.html) in a best-practice compliant way.

If a feature you need is missing, or you discovered a bug in one of the ready-made pipelines, please see if there is already an [issue in our GitHub repository](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/issues), and open a new one if that is not the case.

> In some cases, specialised features might not be desirable for inclusion in the ready-made pipelines.

Reviewer: Is there a general consensus regarding GB English versus American English spelling?

Author: 🇺🇸 

Did I sneak in some 🍵 English here?

Reviewer: Then it should be speciali*z*ed.

You can still benefit from the qualities they provide if you can address your requirements via an **Extension**.

Extensions are custom bits of pipeline coding that you can use to implement special requirements.

> Before building extensions, please make sure that no better alternative works for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before building extensions, please make sure that there really is no better alternative.
```
or
```suggestion
Before building extensions, please make sure that there is no alternative which works better for you.
```

"no better alternative works for you" implies that there can be a better alternative, but it doesn't work for you.

> In this option, you use the centrally maintained pipeline, but can change individual stages if required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this option, you use the centrally maintained pipeline, but can change individual stages if required.
```

To do so, create a file called `<StageName>.groovy` (for example, `Acceptance.groovy` or `lint.groovy`) in `.pipeline/extensions/` in your application's source code repository.

For this, you need to know the technical identifiers for stage names.

* For the general purpose pipeline, you can find them in [the pipeline source file](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/blob/master/vars/piperPipeline.groovy).

> * For SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline, you can find them in [this GitHub search query](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline-lib/search?q=%22def+stageName+%3D%22).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For the SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline, you can find them in [this GitHub search query](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline-lib/search?q=%22def+stageName+%3D%22).
```

> * For SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline, you can find them in [this GitHub search query](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline-lib/search?q=%22def+stageName+%3D%22).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline, you can find them with [this GitHub search query](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline-lib/search?q=%22def+stageName+%3D%22).
```

> The centrally maintained pipeline checks if such a file exists and executes it, if present.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The centrally maintained pipeline checks if such a file exists and executes it if present.
```

A parameter of type `Map` that contains the following keys is passed to the extension:

> * `script`: defines the global script environment of the `Jenkinsfile` run. This makes sure that the correct configuration environment can be passed to project "Piper" steps and allows access to for example the `commonPipelineEnvironment`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `script`: defines the global script environment of the `Jenkinsfile` run. This makes sure that the correct configuration environment can be passed to project "Piper" steps and allows access to, for example, the `commonPipelineEnvironment`.
```

> * `originalStage`: this will allow you to execute the "original" stage at any place in your script. If omitting a call to `originalStage()` only your code will be executed instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `originalStage`: this will allow you to execute the "original" stage at any place in your script. If omitting a call to `originalStage()` only your code will be executed.
```

> * `originalStage`: this will allow you to execute the "original" stage at any place in your script. If omitting a call to `originalStage()` only your code will be executed instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `originalStage`: this will allow you to execute the "original" stage at any place in your script. If omitted only your code will be executed instead.
```

> * `originalStage`: this will allow you to execute the "original" stage at any place in your script. If omitting a call to `originalStage()` only your code will be executed instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `originalStage`: this will allow you to execute the "original" stage at any place in your extension script. If omitting a call to `originalStage()` only your code will be executed instead.
```

> * `stageName`: name of the current stage

Reviewer 2: Why is this in the map? Why is it relevant?

* `config`: configuration of the stage and general config (including all defaults)

Here is a simple example for such an extension, which you can use as a starting point:

```groovy
void call(Map params) {
  //access stage name
  echo "Start - Extension for stage: ${params.stageName}"

  //access config
  echo "Current stage config: ${params.config}"

  //execute original stage as defined in the template
  params.originalStage()

  //access overall pipeline script object
  echo "Branch: ${params.script.commonPipelineEnvironment.gitBranch}"

  echo "End - Extension for stage: ${params.stageName}"
}
return this
```

!!! note "`return this`"
    Don't forget the `return this` which is required at the end of _all_ extension scripts.
    This is due to how Groovy loads scripts internally.

!!! note "Init stage cannot be extended"
    Please note, the `Init` stage among other things also checks out your current repository including your extensions.<br />

>     Thus it is not possible to use extensions on this stage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Thus it is not possible to use extensions in this stage.
```

### Practical example

> For a more practical example, you can use extensions in SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline to add custom linters to the pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a more practical example, you can use extensions in the [SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline/blob/master/s4sdk-pipeline.groovy) to add custom linters to the pipeline.
```

> A linter is a tool that can check the source code for certain stylistic criteria, and many teams chose to use a linter to ensure a common programming style.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A linter is a tool that can check the source code for certain stylistic criteria, and many teams choose to use a linter to ensure a common programming style.
```

As an example, if you want to use [Checkstyle](https://checkstyle.sourceforge.io/) in your codebase, you might use an extension similar to this one in a file called `.pipeline/extensions/lint.groovy` in your project:

```groovy
def call(Map parameters) {

>     parameters.originalStage() // Runs the built in linters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // First run the build-in linters
    parameters.originalStage()
```

Author: It is "built in" in that case (maybe with the dash), cf https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/built-in

Reviewer 2: Yes, of course! But the dash is relevant I believe.

>     mavenExecute(

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // Then run Checkstyle linter
    mavenExecute(
```

Author: Does that comment explain anything? I think from the context it is clear that this is happening, isn't it?

Reviewer 2: It is not clear to me, probably because I have very little experience with linters. What is confusing is that you call mavenExecute to use the Checkstyle linter. But, adding the explanatory text below the code solves this issue.

Reviewer: Then maybe go all the way with the comment and hint at the goal, i.e. "Then run Checkstyle linter via mvn goal"

        script: parameters.script,
        flags: '--batch-mode',
        pomPath: 'application/pom.xml',
        m2Path: s4SdkGlobals.m2Directory,
        goals: 'checkstyle:checkstyle',
    )

>     recordIssues blameDisabled: true,

Reviewer 2: Add comment explaining what `recordIssues` would do here.

Author: I added some text after this code snippet explaining what is going on. I think this is better compared to a code comment. Thanks for the suggestion.

        enabledForFailure: true,
        aggregatingResults: false,
        tool: checkStyle()
}

return this
```

This example can be adapted for other linters of your choice.

## 2) Modified ready-made pipeline

> This option describes how you can copy and paste one of the centrally maintained pipelines to make changes not possible otherwise.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This option describes how you can copy and paste one of the centrally maintained pipelines to prevent other changes.
```

Author: I think this is a misunderstanding. What I want to say is that you can do more with this option that is not possible with option 1. Makes sense?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This option describes how you can copy and paste one of the centrally maintained pipelines to make changes to it that are not possible otherwise.
```

> For example, you can't change the order of stages, change which stages run in parallel or add new stages to a centrally maintained pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, you can't change the order of stages, change which stages run in parallel, or add new stages to a centrally maintained pipeline.
```

> For example, you can't change the order of stages, change which stages run in parallel or add new stages to a centrally maintained pipeline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, you can't change the order of stages and the stages that run in parallel or add new stages to a centrally maintained pipeline.
```

> This might be done for an individual project (in the `Jenkinsfile`), or in a separate git repository so it can be used for multiple projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This might be done for an individual project (in the `Jenkinsfile`), or in a separate Git repository so it can be used for multiple projects.
```

### Single project

> The default `Jenkinsfile` of centrally maintained pipelines does nothing except for loading the pipeline and running it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default `Jenkinsfile` of centrally maintained pipelines does nothing else but loading the pipeline and running it.
```

> This is convenient, but limits which aspects of the pipeline are modifiable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is convenient but limits the modifiable aspects of the pipeline.
```

> If you have one project using the pipeline, the easiest way to do this modification is to copy the pipeline into your `Jenkinsfile`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have a project using the pipeline, the easiest way to do this modification is to copy the pipeline into your `Jenkinsfile`.
```

> If you have one project using the pipeline, the easiest way to do this modification is to copy the pipeline into your `Jenkinsfile`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If one of your projects uses the pipeline, the easiest way to do this modification is to copy the pipeline into your `Jenkinsfile`.
```

> The basic structure of your `Jenkinsfile` should be like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The basic structure of your `Jenkinsfile` should be the following:
```

```groovy

> @Library(/* Shared library definition, see ¹ */) _

Reviewer 2: How about instead of this 1 symbol used twice below you write:
"See hint below" and add a note box below with !!!

Author: thanks, did that

This is comfortable, but limits which aspects of the pipeline are modifiable.

If you have one project using the pipeline, the easiest way to do this modification is to copy the pipeline into your Jenkinsfile.

The basic structure of your `Jenkinsfile` should be like this:

```groovy

> @Library(/* The libraries you need depends on the pipeline you use */) _

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@Library(/* The libraries you need depend on the pipeline you use */) _
```
or

```suggestion
@Library(/* Which libraries you need depends on the pipeline you use */) _
```

The actual pipeline code (the `call` method in the listing above) can be found here:

* [General purpose pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/blob/master/vars/piperPipeline.groovy)
    * ¹ For this pipeline, you need to load this library: `'piper-lib-os@vINSERT_VERSION_HERE'`

> * [SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline-lib/blob/master/vars/cloudSdkPipeline.groovy)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [SAP Cloud SDK pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline-lib/blob/master/vars/cloudSdkPipeline.groovy)
```

>     * ¹ For this pipeline, you need to load this library: `'s4sdk-pipeline-library@vINSERT_VERSION_HERE'`

Reviewer 2: I suggest having a 'note' box here.

For the version identifier, please see the section _How to stay up-to-date_ in this document.

### Multiple projects

If you have multiple projects that share a similar architecture, it might be desirable to share one modified pipeline amongst them.
Similar to what you can do in an individual `Jenkinsfile`, you can copy the pipeline to your own shared library and modify it.

> To do this, create a new git repository in your preferred git hosting service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To do this, create a new Git repository in your preferred Git hosting service.
```

It must be compliant to [how Jenkins shared libraries are built](https://jenkins.io/doc/book/pipeline/shared-libraries/).

> In a nutshell, this means you need a `vars` directory inside which you can place a copy of your preferred pipeline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a nutshell, this means that you need a `vars` directory inside which you can place a copy of your preferred pipeline.
```

> A minimal example of such a library could have this directory structure:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A minimal example of such a library could have the following directory structure:
```

```
./vars/myCustomPipeline.groovy
./README.md
```

> Where `myCustomPipeline.groovy` contains the modified pipeline code of the [general purpose pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/blob/master/vars/piperPipeline.groovy) or [SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline-lib/blob/master/vars/cloudSdkPipeline.groovy).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`myCustomPipeline.groovy` contains the modified pipeline code of the [general purpose pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/blob/master/vars/piperPipeline.groovy) or [SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline-lib/blob/master/vars/cloudSdkPipeline.groovy).
```

!!! note

>     Your custom pipeline _must_ be named differently from the other pipelines provided by project "Piper", because Jenkins requires names across multiple libraries to be unique.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The name of your custom pipeline _must_ differ from the other pipelines provided by project "Piper" because Jenkins requires names across multiple libraries to be unique.
```

> This library must be placed in a git repository which is available for Jenkins and must be configured in Jenkins [as documented here](https://jenkins.io/doc/book/pipeline/shared-libraries/#using-libraries).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This library must be placed in a Git repository, which is available for Jenkins and must be configured in Jenkins [as documented here](https://jenkins.io/doc/book/pipeline/shared-libraries/#using-libraries).
```

> This screenshot shows an example of the configuration in Jenkins.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following screenshot shows an example of the configuration in Jenkins.
```

> Note the name (1) must be the same you use in your `Jenkinsfile`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that the name (1) must be the same as the one you use in your `Jenkinsfile`.
```

![Library Setup](images/customPipelineLib.png "Library Setup")

> The `Jenkinsfile` of your individual projects would look similar to this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `Jenkinsfile` of your individual projects would look similar to the following:
```

```groovy
@Library(['piper-lib-os@vINSERT_VERSION_HERE','my-own-pipeline@vINSERT_VERSION_HERE']) _

> myCustomPipeline script: this

Reviewer 2: You could also load a custom pipeline (Jenkinsfile) that is located in another repo.

Author: Not sure if I understand your comment. This part describes how to share a custom pipeline (as part of a jenkins lib) amongst multiple projects. What would you change?

Reviewer 2: Maybe I didn't position the comment very good. My comment refers to the whole sub-chapter "__Multiple projects__". For multiple projects you suggest defining a pipeline in a custom lib, which IMO is a relatively complicated approach. When instead it would be possible to have a modified pipeline (as suggested in the "__Single project__" approach) in another repo and load that from multiple projects. 

IMO the lib approach is to add functionality that you don't have otherwise, _not_ to define pipelines.

Reviewer 2: I yield then.

myCustomPipeline script: this
```

Be sure to adapt the names and version identifiers accordingly.

### How to stay up-to-date

> Regardless which of the above options you choose, one downside of this approach is that your pipeline will be out of sync with the centrally maintained pipelines at some point in time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regardless of which of the above options you choose, one downside of this approach is that your pipeline will be out of sync with the centrally maintained pipelines at some point in time.
```

I know it sounds strange, but I think it is more correct.

!!! warning "Don't depend on stage implementation details"

>     Your pipeline should treat _stages_ as a black box, the implementation of stages is no published API and may be subject to change at any time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Your pipeline should treat _stages_ as a black box, the stage implementations are not a published API and may be subject to change at any time.
```

!!! warning "Beware of breaking changes"
    Please be aware that when using the `master` branch of a library, it might always happen that breaking changes occur.

>     We recommend to always fix versions to a released version like in this example: `@Library('my-shared-library@1.0') _`<br />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    We recommend to always fix versions to a released version like in this example: `@Library('my-shared-library@v1.0') _`<br />
```

>     Find the most recent release for [jenkins-library](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/releases) and for [SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline/releases) on GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Find the most recent release for the [jenkins-library](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/releases) and for the [SAP Cloud SDK Pipeline](https://github.com/SAP/cloud-s4-sdk-pipeline/releases) on GitHub.
```

    We do recommend to ["watch" releases for those repositories on GitHub](https://help.github.com/en/github/receiving-notifications-about-activity-on-github/watching-and-unwatching-releases-for-a-repository).

!!! note "When to go with a modified ready-made pipeline"

>     This option is right for you, when none of the provided ready-made pipelines serves your purpose, and individual stage extensions don't provide enough flexibility.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    This option is right for you if none of the provided ready-made pipelines serves your purpose, and individual stage extensions don't provide enough flexibility.
```

### Advanced tips and information

When you consider adding additional capabilities, your first stop should be the [Jenkins Pipeline Steps Reference](https://jenkins.io/doc/pipeline/steps/).

> Here you get an overview about what kind of capabilities are already available, and a list of related parameters which you can use to customize the existing implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here you get an overview about what kind of capabilities are already available, and a list of related parameters, which you can use to customize the existing implementation.
```

> Here you get an overview about what kind of capabilities are already available, and a list of related parameters which you can use to customize the existing implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here you get an overview of what kind of capabilities are already available and a list of related parameters, which you can use to customize the existing implementation.
```

> The provided information should help you to understand and extend the functionality of your pipeline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The provided information should help you understand and extend the functionality of your pipeline.
```

> ## 3) New pipeline from scratch

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## 3. New Pipeline from Scratch
```

Since project "Piper" fully builds on [Jenkins Pipelines as Code](https://jenkins.io/doc/book/pipeline-as-code/), you can also go with your own pipeline from scratch in a `Jenkinsfile`.

!!! danger "Decoupling"

>     If you go this route you will be decoupled from the innovations provided with project "Piper", unless you re-use for example stages (as indicated above under _2) Modified ready-made pipelines_).

Reviewer 2: Can you add a link to _2) Modified ready-made pipelines_?

>     If you go this route you will be decoupled from the innovations provided with project "Piper", unless you re-use for example stages (as indicated above under _2) Modified ready-made pipelines_).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    If you choose this option, you will be decoupled from the innovations provided with project "Piper", unless you re-use stages (as indicated above under _2. Modified ready-made pipelines_), for example.
```

>     **We recommend to use this only when none of the other provided options suit your use-case.**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    **We recommend using this only when none of the other provided options suit your use case.**
```

# Extensibility

> When using one of the ready-made pipelines of project "Piper", you don't have to write custom pipeline code.

Reviewer 5: Maybe we could add a summary in the form of a picture about the various options at the beginning.

Author: Good idea, I've added a proposal to the latest commit. Any suggestions about that?

Reviewer 5: Looks pretty good. Not sure if we need the headings though

The pipelines are centrally maintained and can be used with only a small amount of declarative configuration as documented [here](configuration.md).

For the vast majority of _standard_ projects, the features of the ready-made pipelines should be enough to implement [Continuous Delivery](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ContinuousDelivery.html) with little effort in a best-practice compliant way.

> If you miss a feature or discover a bug in one of our pipelines, please see if there is already an [issue in our GitHub repository](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/issues) and if not, open a new one.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you miss a feature or discover a bug in one of our pipelines, please see if there is already an [open issue in our GitHub repository](https://github.com/SAP/jenkins-library/issues) and if not, open a new one.
```

In some cases, it's not desirable to include specialized features in the ready-made pipelines.
However, you can still benefit from their qualities, if you address your requirements through an **extension**.
Extensions are custom bits of pipeline coding, which you can use to implement special requirements.
Before building extensions, please make sure that there is no alternative that works better for you.

Options for extensibility, in the order in which we recommend considering them:

## 1. Extend individual stages

> In this option, you use the centrally maintained pipeline but can change individual stages, if required.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this option, you use the centrally maintained pipeline but can extend or even exchange individual stages, if required.
```

Author: I'm a bit hesitant to write this explicitly because it is more complicated to totally rewrite a stage. Users who are advanced enough to do that will understand it anyway, right?

To do so, create a file called `<StageName>.groovy` (for example, `Acceptance.groovy` or `lint.groovy`) in `.pipeline/extensions/` in the source code repository of your application.

> For this, you need to know the technical identifiers for stage names.

Reviewer 4: Isn't this simply the name that is also displayed in Jenkins?

Author: Not for the Cloud SDK Pipeline (no need to discuss, that decision was made years ago and we can't change it for compatibility reasons)

* `originalStage`: Allows you to execute the "original" stage at any place in your script. If omitting a call to `originalStage()`, only your code is executed.
* `stageName`: Name of the current stage
* `config`: Configuration of the stage and general config (including all defaults)

Here is a simple example for such an extension, which you can use as a starting point:

```groovy
void call(Map params) {
  //access stage name
  echo "Start - Extension for stage: ${params.stageName}"

  //access config
  echo "Current stage config: ${params.config}"

  //execute original stage as defined in the template
  params.originalStage()

  //access overall pipeline script object
  echo "Branch: ${params.script.commonPipelineEnvironment.gitBranch}"

  echo "End - Extension for stage: ${params.stageName}"
}
return this
```

!!! note "`return this`"
    Don't forget the `return this`, which is required at the end of _all_ extension scripts.
    This is due to how Groovy loads scripts internally.

!!! note "Init stage cannot be extended"

>     Please note that the `Init` stage also checks your current repository including your extensions.<br />

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    Please note that the `Init` stage also checks out your current repository including your extensions.<br />
```

    Therefore, it is not possible to use extensions on this stage.

### Practical example

> For a more practical example, you can use extensions in the SAP Cloud SDK pipeline to add custom linters to your pipeline.

Reviewer 4: Typically I would expect this to be configured in the POM to run also in the build. But an extension then could cover there publication of the results.

> For a more practical example, you can use extensions in the SAP Cloud SDK pipeline to add custom linters to your pipeline.

Author: Are you opposed to the general idea of having a practical example here?

I think it nicely shows how you can make use of piper provided steps (mavenExecute) and "upstream Jenkins" plugins (recordIssues). And it does solve a question we got a few times about the Cloud SDK PIpeline where we abstained from adding it to the default pipeline for reasons.

I would like to keep this here, but I am also happy to add another example that is tailored to the General Purpose pipeline, if you can provide one.

> For a more practical example, you can use extensions in the SAP Cloud SDK pipeline to add custom linters to your pipeline.

Reviewer 6: But maybe you don't want to have it configured in your pom and run with every maven command locally or you use npm and you have to run an additional npm command. 
Of collecting the results of course you could use `checksPublishResults`, but it still depends on the deprecated plugins and you may just want to focus on collecting the results for this specific tool.
Therefore, this example is also a nice illustration of how to use other native Jenkins steps in extensions.

```groovy
def call(Map parameters) {

    parameters.originalStage() // Runs the built in linters

    mavenExecute(
        script: parameters.script,
        flags: '--batch-mode',
        pomPath: 'application/pom.xml',
        m2Path: s4SdkGlobals.m2Directory,
        goals: 'checkstyle:checkstyle',
    )

    recordIssues blameDisabled: true,
        enabledForFailure: true,
        aggregatingResults: false,
        tool: checkStyle()
}

return this
```

This code snippet has three components, let's see what is happening here:

Firstly, we run the original stage.
This runs the SAP UI5 Best Practices linter as this is a standard feature of SAP Cloud SDK pipeline.

Secondly, we run the checkstyle maven plugin using the `mavenExecute` Jenkins library step as provided by project "Piper".
This serves as an example for how flexible you can re-use what project "Piper" already provides in your extension.

Finally, we use the Jenkins [Warnings NG plugin](https://plugins.jenkins.io/warnings-ng/) and its step `recordIssues` to make the findings visible in the Jenkins user interface.

This example can be adapted for other linters of your choice.

> Be sure to checkout the _Library steps_ section of this documentation if you want to do this.

Reviewer 2: Provide link to _Library steps_ section

Author: is there a deep link? I'm not aware.

> Be sure to checkout the _Library steps_ section of this documentation if you want to do this.

Reviewer 2: I misunderstood! You are referring to the section in the table of contents. I don't know how to write this better... Maybe something in the line of: "Be sure to checkout the specific step you want to adapt in the _Library steps_ section of this documentation..."

Project "Piper" provides some basic building blocks such as `dockerExecute` and the already mentioned `mavenExecute` which might be helpful.

## 2. Modified Ready-Made Pipeline

This option describes how you can copy and paste one of the centrally maintained pipelines to make changes not possible otherwise.
For example, you can't change the order of stages and the stages that run in parallel or add new stages to a centrally maintained pipeline.
This might be done for an individual project (in the `Jenkinsfile`), or in a separate Git repository so it can be used for multiple projects.

### Single project

The default `Jenkinsfile` of centrally maintained pipelines does nothing else but loading the pipeline and running it.
This is convenient but limits the modifiable aspects of the pipeline.

If one of your projects uses the pipeline, the easiest way to do this modification is to copy the pipeline into your `Jenkinsfile`.

The basic structure of your `Jenkinsfile` should be the following:

```groovy
@Library(/* Shared library definition, see below */) _

> call script: this

Author: > I guess in the end we should make it as easy as possible for users.

Yes, this is what I'm aiming for. I would argue that copying the template and filling in the call method is easier compared to the search and replace you would otherwise need to do, but I'm open to be convinced otherwise.

![Library Setup](images/customPipelineLib.png "Library Setup")

The `Jenkinsfile` of your individual projects would look similar to the following:

```groovy
@Library(['piper-lib-os@vINSERT_VERSION_HERE','my-own-pipeline@vINSERT_VERSION_HERE']) _

myCustomPipeline script: this
```

Be sure to adapt the names and version identifiers accordingly, as described in _How to stay up-to-date_.

### How to stay up-to-date

Regardless of which of the above options you choose, one downside of this approach is that your pipeline will be out of sync with the centrally maintained pipelines at some point in time.
We strongly recommend doing _as little modification as possible_ to fulfil your requirements.
Please be aware that stages may have dependencies on each other.

!!! warning "Don't depend on stage implementation details"
    Your pipeline should treat _stages_ as a black box, the stage implementations are not a published API and may be subject to change at any time.

!!! warning "Beware of breaking changes"
    Please be aware that when using the `master` branch of a library, it might always happen that breaking changes occur.

>     We recommend to always fix versions to a released version like in this example: `@Library('my-shared-library@v1.0') _`<br />

Reviewer 5: For the Open Source library I believe that we once agreed to recommend to always use `master`.

In the end it should be a decision of the pipeline itself.
For the general purpose one we use `master`:
https://sap.github.io/jenkins-library/stages/introduction/#2-create-jenkinsfile

For the section "How to stay up-to date" we may go with a more fine-grain recommendation. 
If you have a custom pipeline and create yourself certain dependencies you may have a fixed version. 
If you just re-use stages as a black-box you may well go with `master`

Generally, we should be cautious with recommendations in order to not be inconsistent.

    To stay up to date with the latest releases, you can ["watch" releases for those repositories on GitHub](https://help.github.com/en/github/receiving-notifications-about-activity-on-github/watching-and-unwatching-releases-for-a-repository).

!!! note "When to go with a modified ready-made pipeline"
    This option is right for you if none of the provided ready-made pipelines serves your purpose, and individual stage extensions don't provide enough flexibility.

### Advanced tips and information

When you consider adding additional capabilities, your first stop should be the [Jenkins Pipeline Steps Reference](https://jenkins.io/doc/pipeline/steps/).
Here you get an overview of what kind of capabilities are already available and a list of related parameters, which you can use to customize the existing implementation.
The provided information should help you understand and extend the functionality of your pipeline.

## 3. New Pipeline from Scratch

Since project "Piper" fully builds on [Jenkins Pipelines as Code](https://jenkins.io/doc/book/pipeline-as-code/), you can also go with your own pipeline from scratch in a `Jenkinsfile`.

!!! danger "Decoupling"

>     If you choose this option, you will be decoupled from the innovations provided with project "Piper", unless you re-use stages (as indicated above under _2. Modified ready-made pipelines_), for example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If you choose this option, you will be decoupled from the innovations provided with project "Piper", unless you re-use stages (as indicated above under [_2. Modified ready-made pipelines_](/extensibility.md#2-modified-ready-made-pipeline)), for example.
```
